5-bit lower immediates. 11-bit upper immediates. 8 16-bit registers. 8-bit ALU.

8 16-bit registers: 8x SN74LS670, 98 gates each, ~2352 transistors. About half
a 6502, as it should be.

Okay, that gives us one simulataneous read and write port.

Okay, let's look at the classic risc pipeline.

We'll need two cycles to fetch:
fetch lo
fetch hi

After these two cycles have executed, we'll have the instruction latched into a
16-bit register.
TODO: Source.

Now, we'd *immediately* like to begin fetching the next instruction. That means
that we lose access to the opcode. That means that you can't just place the
opcode somewhere; it's a PIPELINE.

What that means is that each stage will have a set of registers as its inputs
and a set of registers as its outputs. So, what are these for the fetch stages?

fetch lo: inputs: none, outputs: inst lo
fetch hi: inputs: inst lo, outputs: inst lo, inst hi

Now, if we actually made registers for these, we could, without other concerns,
start fetch lo of the next insructoin immediately after fetch lo of the
previous:

fetch lo
fetch hi | fetch lo

That would work fine on the inside, but we can't actually do two fetches at the
same time on the outside. In such cases, we must defer issuing the next
instruction; and that means we're free to **pass through** an input to the
output using only a single register.

So, let's just name the next stage next, and decide it doesn't do anything.

fetch lo: inputs: none, outputs: inst lo
fetch hi: inputs: none, outputs: inst lo, inst hi
next:   inputs: inst lo, inst hi, outputs: opcode, rd1, rs1, rs2, imm | fetch lo: inputs none, outputs: inst lo

Now, it's fine to have an output and input of the same reg at the same time;
one completes as the clock; the other begins at the clock, so they don't
actually overlap.

Our do nothing next stage needs to output all of the parts of the instruction,
since it doesn't do anything. We're not aiming for a very high fmax, because
our old slow DRAMs are old and slow. The goal is to produce a better 6502, so
we want as much work in each pipeline stage as we can stomach. Only needs to go
at 1MhZ, after all!

The more next does, the fewer outputs it needs. Our goal is to do an ALU
operation, but to do that, we may need up to 2 register operands. So, it should
fetch the first one.

fetch lo: inputs: none, outputs: inst lo
fetch hi: inputs: none, outputs: inst lo, inst hi
read_reg: inputs: inst lo, inst hi, outputs: opcode, rd1, rs1 value, rs2, imm | fetch lo: inputs none, outputs: inst lo

Next, we can read the other register and do the low ALU operation:

fetch lo:            inputs: none, outputs: inst lo
fetch hi:            inputs: none, outputs: inst lo, inst hi
read reg:            inputs: inst lo, inst hi, outputs: opcode, rd1, rs1 lo, rs1 hi, rs2, imm | fetch lo: inputs none, outputs: inst lo
alu lo; read reg 2:  inputs: rd1, rs1 lo, rs1 hi, rs2, imm, outputs: opcode, rd1, alu_lo, rs1 hi,  | fetch hi: inputs none, outputs: inst lo, inst hi

Okay, all well and good. But what's the *shape* of the overall pipeline? Stuff
needs to be there, even if it's not used. So, let's pack each instruction type
as tight as it will go, then name the pipeline.

reg reg arithmetic:
fetch lo
fetch hi
read reg 1
alu lo; read reg 2
alu hi; write destination

reg imm arithmetic:
fetch lo
fetch hi
read reg 1; alu lo
alu hi; write destination

jal:
fetch lo
fetch hi; alu lo; write dest

jalr:
fetch lo
fetch hi; write dest
read reg; alu lo
alu hi

beq:
fetch lo
fetch hi; alu lo
alu hi; read reg 1
read reg 2; alu lo
alu hi; 

loadb:
fetch lo
fetch hi; alu lo

Resources: ALU, register file read, register file write, memory

Let's be simple!!!!

Fetch low
Fetch hi
Decode
read reg 1
read reg 2
alu lo
alu hi
write reg
alu lo (branch)
alu hi (branch)

Offset that by two, what do we get?

Fetch low
Fetch hi
Decode            | Fetch low
read reg 1        | Fetch hi
read reg 2        | decode
alu lo            | read reg 1
alu hi            | read reg 2
write reg         | alu lo
alu lo (branch)   | alu hi ERROR
alu hi (branch)   

Alright, so an observation is that most of our operations come in pairs. A
resource is used for two cycles, and we don't want those to be able to line up. So:

fetch low
fetch hi
decode 1         | fetch lo
decode 2         | fetch hi
read reg 1       | decode 1
read reg 2       | decode 2
alu lo           | read reg 1
alu hi           | read reg 2
write 1          | alu lo
write 2          | alu hi
alu lo (branch)  | write 1
alu hi (branch)  | write 2
                 | alu lo (branch)
                 | alu hi (branch)

Okay, so another observation. It's not just two instructions that overlap, it's
all of them. In a full pipeline, every pair of stages overlaps with every other
pair. That means that alu (branch) overlaps with alu, which isn't okay.

Now, an alu (branch) only actually needs to happen on a taken branch. If a
branch occurs, some set of instruction will be further along than this one.
Assume none of them can be branches. We need to delay the next instruction
anyway so that its fetch starts after alu hi (branch). So none of the next
instructions can overlap with it either. All good.

Actually, we can think about this as just the classic risc pipeline, except
each phase has two cycles.

fetch
decode / read
execute
memory access
writeback

How about unconditional jumps? Writeback sets the PC and flushes the pipeline.

Branches work the same way; just that the writeback flush only occurs if the
branch is actually taken.

Flushing the pipeline can be done by changing the input of all cycles to what
they would be if the canonical NOP were issued, addi x0, x0, 0. Fetch's output
is changed to this opcode, the outputs of decode are changed to imm 0, x0, and
x0, and the results of execute are changed to 0.

How much work is thrown away? 3 cycles for the next instruction, 2 for the one
after that, and 1 for the one after that. So a 6 cycle penalty.

Memory accesses are in-order, so there are no memory hazards. What about registers?

Say we read a r1 in the decode phase. Any previous instruction that hasn't yet
written to r1 is a hazard. We detect the hazard after the following instruction
has been decoded; we can't know about it yet in the previous instruction.

Accordingly, the simplest thing to do is to stall fetch and decode in place
(don't toggle their flips) until writeback of the previous instruction is finished.

This actually means that we need to keep around the set of registers that are
currently in process of being written. Later decodes will stall until that set
empties of any register read by the instruction. The decode then introduces its
own writes into the set, and writeback clears them. It's more a bag then.

How many writebacks could clear before a decode? Three; previous instructions
in flight could be in the execute, memory access, or write back stages. We can
keep with each state a 3-bit register that names the writeback register (if
any). These then move along the last three stages of the pipeline, and they
eventually fall off the end after writeback.

That's going to be quite expensive to compare to the decoded read register set.
Is forwarding cheaper? Yes, but it only applies if the result is from execute,
not memory access.

Hmm, let's just combine execute and memory access then; we can do a load on the
cycle the ALU operation completes.

fetch
decode / read
execute / memory access
writeback

This reveals an error in thinking earlier; fetch can't overlap with memory
access. That's not too much of an issue though; we can just have fetch read a
NOP during a memory access. This inserts a bubble of 2 cycles into the
pipeline.

Actually, we can simplify the whole thing. We can simulataneous do a writeback
with any other operation; writes to PC are already special-cased, and we have a
two port register file.

So, our pipeline only needs three stages:

fetch
decode / read
execute / memory access / writeback

Let's call these:
fetch
decode
execute

Here's a fun way to think of a conditional branch. At the end of the execute
phase, we know whether the branch will be taken, but we don't know where to
yet. We do know that the rest of the pipeline is useless. But, we already know
everything we need to about the decoded form of the branch target; just as well
as the decode phase. So, we can convert it to a JAL x0, target and feed it
right into the execute phase. We still replace fetch and decode with NOPs.

What are the effects of this? Well, we've thrown away a fetch, a fetch and
decode. We also need to run the next execute phase before we can actually do a
fetch. That execute phase will also make fetch read a nop. So, the overall
latency add is 4 phases = 8 cycles. But that's the minimum; it takes exactly
four phases to compute the branch condition and target. AWESOME.

Can we still have RAW hazards? No! A previous cycle's execute feeds data in to
the next cycle's decode if they're simultaneously active. Just make sure to
read/write bytes in the same order.

Okay, so jumps, loads/stores, and branches need to manipulate the pipeline. The
need arises in execute for branches and decode for the others.

For a jump, the fetches during its decode and execute would be wrong. The
correct next instruction isn't known until execute completes. Accordingly, the
decode step should cause the next fetch (during execute) to see a NOP as input
instead of fetching, and it should cause the concurrent fetch step to output a
NOP instead of what it fetched.

For a branch not taken, it has no effect; it's like an arithmetic instruction.

For a taken branch, we could logically think of its execute step as inserting a
new JAL x0, tgt into the pipeline to be fetched, decoded, and executed.
However, this determination is made when the execute of the branch finishes. At
that point, the fetch and decode for that logical instruction have just
finished, based on the instruction after the branch. That's perfect; the
execute of the branch is concurrent with the decode of the logical JAL. We can
have the taken branch cause the effects of decoding a JAL, except that it's
triggered by the branch condition, not the opcode. That's all the branch
execute step needs to do to effect the branch.

Similarly, we can have the decode phase of a non-zero shift change the output
of the fetch stage to be that of a shift with a lesser amount. Each stage would
execute in sequence, so it would take between 2 and 14 cycles to issue a shift.
We could also use this trick to convert variable shifts into fixed ones; this
has no penalty, since the first shift operation can be done in the first
instruction.
